---
published: false
title: Automating The Boring Stuff
---
In the past months, the languages I've used most in the V-HCD is [PowerShell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PowerShell). Considering the V-HCD is powered by Unreal Engine, which has support for Blueprint, C++ and Python; you might wonder why do I write PowerShell script. The answer is: to automate the boring stuff. And there's lot of it.

# Context

To better understand what's there to automate, you have to understand our workflow. It's vaguely described in the [Version control](/version-control) article, but I'll try to explain it better here.

The VHCD is a template Unreal Engine project (`vhcd.uproject`), and is versioned as a Git [superproject](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Git/Submodules_and_Superprojects) with the following stored in submodules:

* Marketplace products (>150)
* Plugins (>25)
* Custom assets (>10)
* Dependencies (e.g. [Virtual Driver](/virtual-driver))

When we develop a new experiment with the V-HCD, we [fork](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo) the superproject for this experiment, and all developments specific to that experiment will be done in this fork. This fork is never intended to be merged; it instead will be frozen once the experiment starts, to always have a copy of the exact software used to run the experiment.

# Making submodules

The first thing I automated was submodule creation for Marketplace products. As I mentioned, we have *a lot* of them, and doing that manually would just be too much work. This was very straightforward to automate, it's really just a bunch of command executed in order. You just need to do it once per product, as it's just a way to move it from Epic's server to our own GitLab. So first you need to manually download and install the Marketplace product. Then, you invoke it with the path of the submodule you want to create, e.g. `./make_submodule Content/MyAwesomeVehicle`, and it does everything. The script is something like the following.

```
Add pre-configured .gitattribute and .gitignore to submodule
Git init, add *, commit
Git push // this automatically creates the repo on GitLab!
Back to the superproject: add submodule and commit
```

# Build

Our workflow implies that each user needs to rebuild the source code to run the platform. This obviously isn't ideal for non-developers, especially since the platform is itself a composition of multiple projects, each having its own build process (e.g. [CMake](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CMake)). On top of that, each project needs to be built in a specific configuration to all work together, so automation is pretty much needed is such cases.

One very important aspect of this script (and some others), that differs from the previous one, is that those are *user-oriented* script, not *developer-oriented* script. For me, there's a huge difference between the two. For *user-oriented* script, I have very strict rules about the script:

* Should be run without having to manually spawn a shell (i.e. double click should suffice)
* Should only write useful and understandable messages to the *user* (i.e. not to the *developer*)
* Should only require user input when strictly necessary
* Should be very clear about success and failure (e.g. color)

So with that in mind, we have a very basic PowerShell script that just builds everything in order. There's a green message if it succeeds, and a red one if it fails. Here's the detail of it.

```
Setting up Visual Studio (finding path)
For all dependencies
  cmake.exe ...
  deven.exe ...
Setting up Unreal (finding path)
build.bat ... -projectfiles // To regenerate solution
build.bat ...
```

# Package

This script probably is the most straightforward of them all. It just uses the [Unreal Automation Tool](https://docs.unrealengine.com/4.26/en-US/ProductionPipelines/BuildTools/AutomationTool/) to start a [Build Cook Run](https://docs.unrealengine.com/4.26/en-US/SharingAndReleasing/Deployment/BuildOperations/), with the (optional) added step of [robocopy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robocopy)ing the packaged result to the deployment server that can then install the package on our [nDisplay cluster](ndisplay/)

# Keep your fork in sync!

One of the reason we have this "fork-template-project" worklow is that it allows super quick iteration cycle. If one experiment needs a new feature that was just added to the template project, it can just grab it. If an experiment added a feature that might be useful to the template, it can just as well grab it. This is very useful to us, and each experiment regularly merges updates from the template project (at least weekly).

However, "just grab it" is easier said than done. Especially with non-expert Git users. And especially when you have : [Git LFS](https://git-lfs.github.com/), forks, submodules, large repos and binary files. That's a recipe for disaster. For the first months, we did that manually, and it was ugly. Especially for the end-user, which totally relied on me to do that, as the process wouldn't work smoothly most of the time.

After a while, I realized that if I had a basic automated script for that "just grab it" process, I could then update it to handle each new weird error-case I encountered. Then the more we use the script, the more robust it gets, and the easier the "just grab it" process becomes.

It's only been a few weeks since we started using this script, but it's already showing its worth. Since it's piped to the `build` script mentioned above, **the user can run a single script and get a ready-to-use up-to-date version of the platform**. All that with clear and simple messages written on the terminal, to give them better insights into what's happening, and hopefully heal the scars of all the previous manual operations that they didn't really understand.

# And beyond

