---
published: false
title: 'Workflow in progress #1'
---
What's it like using Unreal Engine to actually implement a driving simulation experiment? What does that workflow look like? Well, we're kind of learning as we go along, and this post is a first of a series (well, maybe) that will look a bit closer at how things go from paper to simulator.

# Context

Before going into how we do things, we must discuss *who* does them. We have the luxury of having not one but two simulation engineers who can be involved in driving simulation experiments. Which is also why we're able to develop our own simulation platform in the first place. I'm one of those two, being more focused on the development of the platform itself, and the operation of our lower-scale simulator. My colleague handles our largest simulator hardware, and all the experiments running on it.

We work with researchers from various fields and background, meaning some have been deeply invested in driving simulation for decades, while others are doing their first immersive experiments. Our goal as simulation engineers is to tailor our workflow and processes to each profile, to ensure that each researcher can get the most out of our driving simulation making skills.

So the workflow discussed in this article definitely isn't the *one* workflow we decided on. It's what we landed on for this project, with team, given our relatively small experience with Unreal Engine. But that's what's empowering about using Unreal Engine: nothing is set in stone, and we can decide to work a very different way tomorrow if need be. And that's already happening, but that'll make for another post!

# Kick-off

It all starts with a very basic description of what the scenario will be. What's a "basic description" you ask? Nobody knows, and since we don't want to start writting detailed procedures of what it is, we just let the researcher tell us, in their own words, what it is they want.

In our case, it was a 3-slides deck, outlining a ~15 minutes scenario, split in 5 areas (each having an different overall actor density and environment). All areas were composed of a sequence of situations, like "pedestrian crossing" of "bike overtaking from the right".

Such description is more than enough to kick-off a project. From that point forward, we scheduled weekly meeting to discuss the progress made on the scenario implementation, and work out how exactly we want to work together moving forward. And over time, that evolved a lot, which is great! It means we're getting better at this.

# Areas

Since the initial description split the scenario into areas, we figured it would be a great unit to work around. So each area got its own [sublevel][subs], and we (well, my colleague, mostly) started working on the first one.

## Road Network

We've already talked about [how we create road network](/making-a-scene/#road-network), but it's worth an update. We still use [RoadRunner](https://www.mathworks.com/products/roadrunner.html), except the tool is now [better](/whats-new-2022-05/#roadrunner-r2022a). Having custom-made french road style, and the ability to create new ones in just a few click, makes creating the road network as easy and fun as playing SimCity.

The back-and-forth between RoadRunner and Unreal Engine is no trouble at all. The newly added [Datasmith](https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/datasmith) feature makes exporting and importing the 3D scene shorter than ever, and our [OpenDRIVE plugin][odrue](https://github.com/brifsttar/OpenDRIVE) also supports reloading `.xodr` asset files.

The ability to change the road network that easily actually is something totally new for us, and as many things throughout this overall workflow: old habits die hard. It's sometimes difficult to grasp all the possibilities that are now within reach.

## Core scenario

Once we have our roads in Unreal, we go straight to scenario. We don't bother with set dressing: this will be done last. Indeed, the scenario will drive choices in terms of what asset to put where.

And by scenario, we mean *core* scenario, i.e., the main features and actors that the participant will interact with. For this project, this mainly involved "Vulnerable Road Users". During this phase, we often go back to RoadRunner to alter the road network, for example if a curve turns out to be too strong, or a junction weirdly-angled.

## Ego

At the same time as the core scenario, we also implement an [autonomous ego driver](/scenario-authoring/#automate-ego), even if the experiment is fully non-autonomous driving. Even though this brings a higher development cost, everyone involved in the project quickly realized how beneficial this was: no need to bother driving (requiring a gamepad or joystick), and we can [speed up](/scenario-authoring/#time-dilation) (and slowdown) the scenario to only focus on the situation we want. 

And we also quickly realized that we smart design decisions, we could actually start the scenario at various starting location. So we configured a few (using very simple Blueprint logic), and we can now select where to start the scenario at from a simple drop-down menu. Simple feature, but *huge* timesaver when working on a situation-rich ~15 minutes scenario.

## Traffic

Once the core scenario is running, we need to add actors that won't directly interact with ego, but that will bring a lot of realism to the overall scenario. In this project, we mostly focused on road traffic, though adding pedestrians on sidewalks would also be done in this stage.

For this use case, we use a few [trigger boxes](https://docs.unrealengine.com/4.27/en-US/Basics/Actors/Triggers/) set on ego's path that can spawn and despawn vehicles at specific locations. Those vehicles rely heavily on the [Virtual Driver's Smart Features](/whats-new-2022-05/#virtual-driver), meaning the scenario author only has to configure the bare minimum for each car (e.g. where to spawn, at what speed).

Implementing traffic once the core scenario is done ensures that it won't misbehave around "main" actors, and that important situations still remain as initially designed.

## Set Dressing

When all moving actors are configured, it's time to add some verticality to our flat road-only world! For this project, we decided that this specific work would be done by the (very creative) researcher, while my engineer colleague worked on the previous steps.

This collaboration means heavily relying on [version control](/version-control/), which isn't exactly Unreal Engine's best strength. But using [sublevels][subs], patience (and forgiveness when things didn't work out!), we managed to get it done. Hopefully, this should be the first and last time having to deal with that, since Unreal Engine 5's [One File Per Actor](/ue5/#world-partition-and-ofpa) should make this type of collaborative work so much simpler.

Actual set dressing is done using our very large [Marketplace](/marketplace) Vault, which is more or less properly sorted using [Collections](https://docs.unrealengine.com/4.27/en-US/Basics/ContentBrowser/UserGuide/Collections/), so that finding a building or lightpole isn't a major headache.

On a side note, as a tool developer, I just love being able to watch people use those tools. It gives instant feedback into what could be done better. For example, after having accidently lost a week's worth of hand-placed road decals, the ability to [proceduraly place them](https://twitter.com/brifsttar/status/1547114742195560448), using OpenDRIVE data, was a nice addition to the [plugin][odrue].

[subs]: https://docs.unrealengine.com/4.27/en-US/Basics/Levels/CollaborateWithSublevels/
[odrue]: https://github.com/brifsttar/OpenDRIVE