---
published: false
title: 'Workflow in progress #2'
---
Second entry in a series that takes a closer look at how we actually get our driving simulation experiment from paper to the simulator. This time, we focus on project where the workflow ended up being very different from our [previous entry](/workflow-1).

# Context

Whereas the previous project involved researchers acustomed to driving simulation, this new project is from a biomechanics lab, where the subject of immersive simulation is completely outside of the usual experiment realm. Which means multiple things: they don't really know what's possible and what isn't, nor how things go "from paper to simulator".

Which is actually really good! Because if your mind isn't stuck in some old ways of doing things, it's much easier to accomplish great new things. And since this project is a first for this lab, they decided to have very reasonsable expectations and goals with regards to driving simulation, which is a very sound decision.

There are mostly two persons involved in this project: a postdoctoral researcher, unfamiliar with driving simulation but very eager to use it, and myself, who work both as tool developer and user in this project.

# Kick-off

So how do we actually get started in this kind of settings? Well, without going too much into the actual scientific details, the project involves the takeover of an autonomous car, so we're not exactly short on litterature or scenario examples.

<video width="720" height="480" controls>
  <source type="video/mp4" src="{{site.baseurl}}/images/cutout.wmv.mp4">
</video>

We quickly decided to go with the common [cut-out scenario](https://www.euroncap.com/en/vehicle-safety/safety-campaigns/2018-automated-driving-tests/), which worked great for our requirements. But with the added particularity: the experiment will require the participant to perform over 30 takeover on this exact scenario. That subtlety will be important later on...

For this project, even though the scenario might sound boring (I've probably implemented over 20 different cut-out scenarios in my relatively short time doing this job), I wanted to make this project exciting. So since it's mostly just two of us on the "driving simulation" front, and my researcher colleague was super excited about this, we decided to try and move *fast*. The scenario is overall simple, so let's try to go from paper to simulator quickly, and then iterate. [Agile](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agile_software_development) driving simulation experiment development.

# MVP

> A [minimum viable product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_viable_product) (MVP) is a version of a product with just enough features to be usable by early customers who can then provide feedback for future product development
