---
published: false
title: 'I hate car mirrors'
---

Driving simulation development is fun and all, right until you remember that actual cars have mirrors. So today I'll rant about that, and maybe explore solutions.

# The problems with...

## Mirrors in games

Driving simulation is kind of "[just a videogame](/just-a-videogame/)", and game developers will tell you: they don't like mirrors.

Why? Well, unless you do [ray-tracing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ray_tracing_(graphics)), which is still quite uncommon, rendering a mirror is basically rendering another image, from another point of view, on top of the actual main image you're already rendering. So in terms of computation cost, it's quite significant.

Of course, modern game engines, such as Unreal, have implemented [various methods](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.1/en-US/reflections-environment-in-unreal-engine/) of rendering reflections, which all come with different cost/benefit ratios, so you can choose which one is best for you. But obviously, better quality means higher cost, there's no way around that.

## *Car* mirrors

So, how are car mirrors different from classic videogame mirrors, and what challenges do they bring?

To start: there are 3 of thems. As if rendering one reflection wasn't enough, we have to deal with 3, at all times, covering a pretty wide field of view. That's just... great.

Then, you have the fact that most of the time, cars are driven outdoors. This implies long view range, covering a lot of actors, with lots of light sources, shadows, etc. A mirror in a room will only ever show what's in this room, so usually a small(ish) number of actors in a clearly defined space. But once we're out, everything's on the table.

And last but not least, car mirrors [aren't planar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Side-view_mirror#Planar,_convex,_aspheric) (unless you're in North America apparently). They're actually convex, or even [aspheric](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aspheric_lens). Their actual shape isn't standardized, so usually they change between car models. So if we want to simulate accurate car mirrors, we have to figure out their shape and how to render reflection on those. Tricky.

## Driver

Not only are mirrors tricky, but the driver adds a layer on top that.

When driving a real car and looking at a mirror, sometimes you'll slightly move your head one way or the other to catch a glimpse of something that's out of the mirror's field of view. That's the nice thing about (real) mirrors: depending on where you're looking at them from, they'll show a different point of view!

But replicating that effect in some simulator setups is quite difficult, especially when considering some of the other challenges mentioned above, like the fact that mirrors aren't planar.

Another issue regarding the driver is more related to why we use simulation in the first place: to study driver's behavior and cognition. To do that, we sometimes rely on [eye-tracking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eye_tracking) and other measurements that can help us understand what the driver perceived from the (simulated) environment.

One recent example is covered on our "[Angular size of partially occluded actors](/angular-size/)" blog entry, which illustrated how we need to compute indicators based on actor visibility. And as [mentioned](/angular-size/#mirrors) in the article, mirrors are again here to ruin our day: not only do we need to measure visibility in the main "direct" view, but we also have to do that for each mirrors.

# How we do it

We've laid out some of the challenges related to car mirrors in driving simulation. Now that it's out, let's focus on how we tackle some of those in our various simulator setups.

## No cabin

First we'll talk about small-scale simulators that don't have an actual cabin with mirrors. Those include common desktop setups with gaming steering wheel and pedals.

In those, we usually display ego's virtual car, which include the mirrors' mesh. To get the reflection displayed in there, we first have to ensure that the mirrors have their own material slot (ideally, one slot per mirror, but you can make it work with a single one) and properly unwrapped UVs. Our go-to ego car for mirrors is [lyoshko](https://www.unrealengine.com/marketplace/en-US/profile/lyoshko)'s [Luxury Car](https://www.unrealengine.com/marketplace/en-US/product/luxury-car) from their [7 Cars Pack](https://www.unrealengine.com/marketplace/en-US/product/7-cars-pack), which I highly recommend.

The actual reflection is generated using a [Scene Capture 2D](https://docs.unrealengine.com/4.27/en-US/Resources/ContentExamples/Reflections/1_7/) at a fixed point of view. This means both no dynamic point of view based on driver's head position (we don't use head-tracking), and also no convex or aspheric reflection, only planar. Using scene capture allows us to fine tune the reflection settings. But that can be tricky, especially with our trade-offs: we use a wider capture field of view than the theoretical planar mirror would give to compensate for the lack of both head movement and convex/aspheric mirror. 

With some shader magic, you could probably emulate convex/aspheric using the simple Scene Capture 2D, or you could use a [Scene Capture Cube](https://docs.unrealengine.com/4.27/en-US/Resources/ContentExamples/Reflections/1_6/), but the performance hit isn't worth it in my opinion.

With the recent progress on [realtime ray tracing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DirectX_Raytracing), it could be interesting to explore that solution for car mirrors.

## With cabin

If your simulator cockpit is large to include physical mirrors, there are a few ways to go about integrating virtual mirrors, and for a while back, arguing about each and every one of those was an (albeit annoying) pastime of mine.

However, let's start by saying that there's also a very *wrong* way of doing it, and I've seen it implemented on some on the most expensive driving simulator, so I think it deserves a warning. If you have a continuous 360° display, **don't** just use real actual mirrors that reflect the display. Mirrors' images should be computed from a point of view that is **not** the "direct" view. The only valid application of real physical mirror is if they point toward a display area that is generated from the *mirrored* driver point of view, and not their *actual* point of view.

Anyway, the most common solution is to use small monitors that are integrated within the mirror frame. For side mirrors you can use standard ratios (16:9). Even though it's not very common to have perfectly rectangular side mirrors, it's not that problematic (and if you think it is, you can rework the frame to cover part of the monitor).

For rear-view mirror, it's a bit harder to find ~10inch ~32:9 monitors, but I know they exist, I just don't know where. Otherwise, for this *and only this* mirror, you can actually keep the real mirror and reflect the "direct" view that is displayed in the rear (if you have rear display). Tthe difference in point of view between direct and mirrored is rather small and has very little impact on overall scene perception (unless you're working on very specific use cases).

If you're integrating monitors inside mirrors' frames, you'll want to flip the image. I've [previously said](/ndisplay/#mirrors) that this was not possible in nDisplay, but it turns out I was wrong: it's [very much possible](https://forums.unrealengine.com/t/mirroring-horizontal-flip-an-ndisplay-viewport/151143/3?u=brifsttar), it was just poorly documented at the time. I've been told that it's even easier to setup in Unreal Engine 5, so rejoice!

## Virtual Reality headsets

I've talked about VR+mirrors in a [previous entry](/vr-headsets/), but to summarize: it's hard enough rendering 1 frame with 3 mirrors at 60Hz, so 2 frames with 3 mirrors each at 90Hz is just... no.

<video width="720" height="480" controls>
  <source type="video/mp4"
src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/725724080526852126/959762928167436318/mirror_eye_tracking.mp4.mp4">
</video>

My workaround so far has been to use the same "Scene Capture" solution as discussed above, but with a custom layer of [foveated rendering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foveated_rendering) over it. Since our VR headsets have eye-trackers, the idea is to render a super low-res low-FPS mirror most of the time, and to only render high-res high-FPS mirror when the driver is actively looking at it.

At the moment this is just a prototype and we've never actually used it ([we don't do much](/vr-headsets/) VR-headset driving simulation), but I was rather impressed by the initial results: the switch from low to high quality is almost undetectable, and the low quality mirrors aren't "so bad looking" that they become salient in the peripheral vision (unless you dip below 1 FPS).

## Mixed Reality headsets

For MR, it really depends on what and how you're mixing worlds. For some use cases, you'll end up having something very similar to VR. But if you use a MR headset in a real cabin, it can become a bit tricky to decide how to blend worlds around mirrors: if you want them virtual, you'll have to ensure seamless integration between the real car body and the virtual mirror frame. If you go with "real world" mirrors, how do you display on those? 

For the latter, a colleague suggested a neat trick: have the actual cabin mirrors rendered by the nDisplay cluster, and show them via the MR passthrough.

That way, in the headset, you'd see the real car dashboard, the virtual world through the windshield, and for mirrors, you'd see the real world monitors displaying the virtual world. The huge benefit of this is that you don't have to handle mirrors in the headset, and can instead focus that valuable rendering power towards a better framerate. The main downside is that you're looking at a screen that's displaying a video feed of another screen displaying the virtual world; so I don't think it's going to look so good. The other downside is that you need to synchronize the nDisplay cluster with a VR headset, which can't be done natively in nDisplay. You can probably get this working using a multiplayer setup, like this [amazing simulator](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vec2OFB1xNw) at [DLR](https://www.dlr.de/ts).

In the end, no-one, including us, will probably ever try this: if you have a real car with nDisplay-able mirrors, you're probably better off using the whole nDisplay cluster with the real car. Mixed reality is probably better suited for no-cabin simulators, where you get an insane immersion boost and much less of a headache blending worlds.